

One model of language that we have, is specifying _what_ transforms we want to transform, and _how_ we want to transform them. There might be various ways to perform the transform, but the simplest way to is to take the file, read the entire string, and then transform that string before sending it back to the _same_ file. But we might also want to send the output to a different file, or to modify the extension as part of the transform.

Querying also has variation. We might want to query by extension, or by filename, or by regexp, with the possibility of exclusion (maybe). Although for now, exclusion isn't all that important. And we want to query _within_ a particular directory, and do so recursively, to find all the matching files of interest.

So we need a way to query paths starting from a particular directory, at minimum. The paths can then be transformed to files, as needed. Files also need to be transformed in several ways: 

- Transform the extension ( as new file)
- Transform the content
- Move the file

How do we express these possibilities? Is it enought to use `mv` and 'cp', or should we seek something else?

An in-place file transformation is not difficult. Read all the text. Close the file. Truncate it. Write the transformed text.

Transforming the extension is less clear. But almost always, we want a _new_ file with the _new_ extension, but the same name, to have the file. But since we're transforming the whole file, it seems de-facto true that any existing file with that name, at that location, is necessarily deleted or at least truncated.

And it's ... rarely the case that we want to _move_ the file. Moving isn't a transforming operation; it's something that is done _after_ the transform. So it doesn't belong here. No; a transform is based on (A) transforming the text, and (B) deciding where the transformed data goes. This is one complete operation; we can't have it sitting in memory for _all_ files; so we either have to _stream_ each action -- locking until the prior action is complete -- or the action itself has to be included. This is a ... decent use case for channels, at minimum, to separate actions out to separate processes. And it's a generalization of pipes -- but we could also just use pipes, and not channels. The problem ... is that the pipes that we have in Purescript are ... a bit shit in terms of usability. I look at them, and the model is still a bit shit, in the sense that I don't easily see what I'm supposed to be doing.
  Just .. yielding values, and awaiting values, I suppose. The difference, perhaps, is in the fact that where a simple Aff returns all values at once, a Pipe, or Conduit, or Flow describes operations that are occurring over multiple values. And so what that means ... is that for any operation, we have to describe in relatively bizarre ways. But this still feels more like simulation and not like a model.
  
We could just use Channels. A channel represents a suspension in computation; and it represents multiple values. In that sense, a pipe just represents a channel composed with a receiving function within an Aff-like monad; the receiving function is thus of an input type and has commands to produce one or more output types, but once it ends, it is ready to receive again. In that sense, connecting pipes together is easy, although all these pipes are actualized -- they aren't repeatable computations in this case; we've actually created a physical channel, rather than a description of one. But this is ... a good thing, perhaps. That means our models return concrete _other_ models as their base, and functions that produce these other models can be _lifted_ into a describing function, if desired. Whereas relying entirely on these abstract monads stops us from ever just ... _doing_ anything properly. Or so it seems to me. It also gives me more tools, generally-speaking.

Hmm. So we have channels now. But they're not ... exactly safe. It's hard to draw a comparison in my mind to Pipes. Each Pipe's monad enables writing the monad to await and yield values, as a Node in the pipeline. The node then runs from start to bottom; when yielding, a node starts the next node's execution until the next node's next suspension point or yield; when awaiting, a node resumes the previous node's execution until its next suspension point or yield. Pipes can be connected end to end, to yield a machine that essentially executes syncronously, even though each portion is responsible for a separate piece of the output stream. And that's very cool, and quite awesome; in much the same way, Channels can enable something similar, though it will be relatively asyncronous in execution, and each process is ... potentially more independent by comparison. That's not necessarily a bad thing.

But I'm still not quite sure how to represent streams of values. Pipes are certainly one means of doing so, but because they have an Input and Output, there's no way to compose them monadically -- and composing them end to end to produce a final Pipe ensures that _all_ pipes are fully consumed and filled with input. That might well be the best way, even if the abstraction of the Pipes library is _too_ abstract for my ordinary usage.
  But the trouble with pipes is that it isn't a monad, and I'm not sure why. I mean, it's clear why it isn't a monad -- rather, each pipe's operation is a monad, which makes sense -- it's a program working with specific kinds of values, and describing how a prior action produces the next action within the node of a pipe. But in composing this as a monad, and connecting pipes by type-matching, we lose higher levels of expression, like the ability to catch errors, or talk about cancellation of the pipeline. Maybe that's just how it has to be.
  
But the bigger problem with Pipes is that it doesn't reflect the reality I want to express in my programs -- at least, not yet. It's worth noting that Pipes are singular and do not multiplex -- but channel-based programs _can_ multiplex to multiple threads to process the output. Likewise, Pipes don't really express the idea of error-handling well -- control is in the entire pipeline, but the reality is that we frequently care _mostly_ about allowing the current context to handle errors -- where Pipes separate into completely-separate processes producing completely-separate streams of data, I ... more-closely want to think of the data as a collection of async-produced items, process them, and possibly emit them again -- but I still think of it as _one_ computation where errors ought to bubble "up". It isn't really a "pipeline" in that sense -- the calling context of the previous step _owns_ the previous step, and an error in the previous step ought to become an error in the next step -- so that the controlling context is always obvious, and always ready to intervene.
  In that sense, I'm not a huge fan of pipes, because there's no clear idea that a pipe is calling the prior pipe as a child. It performs an abstract pull for a value, but in doing so, seems to surrender the possibility of error-handling, or scope -- composition is no longer monadic, and so cross-pipe communication is no longer monadic.
  Something approaching a lazy list is closer to what I want. And not a lazy Effect list, but a lazy Aff list. It's the idea, in essence, that an Aff computation will take place every time I request a value, and that also _might_ error in the current context. So composition stays monadic, and within the Aff monad in some form, leaving me free to catch errors while still _yielding_ a value to the next step. And building a lazy list is thus part of a build process that _guarantees_ an error will go to the next step -- the list surrenders the right to handle its own errors -- even as the consuming Aff context _suspends_ to wait until the lazy list can publish the next value.
  So yes. What we want is an Aff List, composed from an Aff-like Monad in which we can loop and repeatedly 'yield' a value to the output of the list, while pausing at that yield until the next call to get a value is made -- at which point we should _loop_ to repeat the computation, to compute the next async value. At each point, we can run an Aff computation of some kind to generate the values that we want to emit to the output list. We don't need to catch errors; they will be caught for us, and the user of the AffList will be forced to handle it. _Crucially_, we can also take in one or more input lists, and use them for other aff computations. The injection of values to 'take' within the inner computation is thus done through function arguments, not in the type signature of the AffList itself. And _any_ source of values can be injected -- not just AffLists -- making this much more flexible more generally.
  Of course, we then have to draw a difference between AffLists, which are unactuated the way an Aff is, and an ListInst, which is an instantiation of the AffList. This is possible because an AffList, produced by an inner Monad about yielding, is only a _description_ of how the values are generated. It does not need to begin to generate them. Whereas a ListInst actually creates all the machinery and is something we are ready to 'receive' a value from, either directly in an Aff computation or as a part of another AffList computation as we create a new AffList description -- by turning an `AffList a` into a `ListInst a`, we can take its values and yield them as long as we need to into the new list. And while doing these computations, we needn't worry about side-effects on the AffList -- it will not change, because it's not yet actuated, so the composition is stable .
  So whereas every 'receive' command on the ListInst is `receive :: ListInst a -> Aff a`, and is necessarily effectful, whiel we are working with an AffList, we are simply in a Monad -- a description of the program. And this gives us composition possibilities _among_ lists -- something that simply isn't possible with a Pipe, since a Pipe only describes a given node, but describes no more than that -- it cannot, because the nature of the Pipe's machinery is to be independent of any real monad besides its own limited execution model. But I don't want that. I'm writing Aff programs that can err; I want _total_ control of what's going on.
  But if that's true, what, then, is the AffList? What are the properties of this Monad, if fundamentally it represents a yielding computation of a single type of value? What is it like, and what can we use it to do?
  An AffList represents all the information needed to produce a stream of async values that can be _taken_, then are emitted one at a time, when requested. So we can _map_ this. Implementation of the map is almost necessarily in terms of the final implementation. As part of the map, we take f, we take the AffList, and we create a ListInst, and run it to completion, _yielding_ each and ever value in mapped form. We then translate it back into the Monad .... Of course, because of the nature of how Purescript allows type definitions, this means we may need to do all these definitions in one place. But if we need to ... then we need to. What else? Since an AffList is a _template_ monad, and not a value one, we cannot do Fold or Traverse, which rely on values. But we _can_ offer custom Fold functions that fold _within_ the monad, and traverse _within_ the monad itself. We can lift an Aff; it becomes a one-value emission that is created temporarily at runtime whenever a value is requested. We can _take_ values, although that would probably be defined elsewhere. We can lift Foldable values into async publication of a list's values. We can run Applicative, we can run Pure. And of course, we can run the Bind/Monad as well, which, for each value emitted by a prior AffList, becomes _multiple_ values emitted in the final AffList's output.
We can lift effects as well.
  The `list :: Yielder a -> AffList a` function will turn a yielding monad into an AffList monad. It inherently describes what it means to run an Aff program that can end, but can also yield a value to a higher runtime, and suspend until told to resume. It would also include a `launchList :: AffList a -> Yielder (ListInst a) method that would ensure the list instance is created and linked to the overall runtime -- this is needed to ensure the ListInst is linked to the runtime, so that in the final ListInst that is consumed, if that ListInst is cancelled, then so are all the other listInsts, and also if the Aff it is running in is cancelled, so are all the ListInsts that were created. Linking like this is necessary to ensure that cleanup occurs correctly.

Okay. Now we have the AffList. So how do we use it to express the FileTransform? In performing a file transform, only few minor things are needed. 

- First, we need a way to express a query to files. We expect to query within a directory, recursively, and to match by things like extension and file name. That's all that's needed in most cases.
- Second, the query should ultimately return a simple representation of the file with easy handles -- in most cases that I'm using, we just return a representation that allows us to get and set things like the extension, the full absolute path, the actual location of the file, the file's contents (as string), and so on. It should be easy to think about and modify; it should be easy to change the file's directory.
- Third, we should have a file writing API for writing the file representation to disk. This should have options so that we have full control over what we're trying to do -- to write while overwriting, or to write only if the file doesn't exist, or to create the directory path to the file if it doesn't exist, and so on. This should make the process as seamless as possible.

As a consequence, the overall process of using this is simple: Query files, transform the files write metadata, and then commit the file by writing it to disk.